---
layout: post
title: "HP arch"
tags: dev, linux, os
category: dev
---
After six months of lying to myself that I was okay with the speed of Windows 10 on a 2011 HP Compaq Elite 8300, I dug out the HP ProBook I used for most of college and installed Arch Linux. I only tried Windows because my 2017 MacBook Air was not doing well in clamshell mode, and found I hated Command Prompt, the bloat, everything.

My only previous Linux experience was Ubuntu on [an HP Compaq tc1100](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HP_Compaq_tc1100) for four months of 2010. (Two thirds of these HP devices were reposessed by my dad from various workplaces.) I don't claim to fully understand the difference between Linux distributions, but I chose Arch partly out of the same gendered spite that makes me shop for guitar pedals in person. Mostly, I was drawn in by the promise of speed, lightness, and ricing off the AUR. In total, this took about a half dozen attempts in one afternoon. I pieced the process together from a combination of the Arch wiki and two YouTube walkthroughs. I didn't dual boot since this machine was on Windows 8 and I'd backed up everything four years ago, but it felt very [clean](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JhQifZBzFT4).

## UEFI boot
This was the primary culprit, and something so embarrassingly early in the process that I feel quite foolish for making it all the way to rebooting a few times over before I realized. Setup interfaces vary between manufacturers, so a quick

`$ ls sys/firmware/efi/efivars`

once you've booted from your USB lets you make extra sure where you are. I was able to disable legacy boot and chose "UEFI boot without CSM" on the jank HP-branded interface, but it might be more prudent to boot into the existing OS and figure out what's going on in settings.

## Partitions
I used `cfdisk` instead of the wiki-recommended `fdisk` because it prints an actual table--you know, as in `fstab`. After sizing, mine looks like

| Device    | Size     | Type             |
|-----------|----------|------------------|
| /dev/sda1 | 100M     | EFI filesystem   |
| /dev/sda2 | 4G       | Linux filesystem |
| /dev/sda3 | (115.1G) | Linux filesystem |

Formatting:

```bash
$ mkfs.fat -F 32 /dev/sda1
$ mkswap /dev/sda2
$ mkfs.ext4 /dev/sda3
```

Mounting:
```bash
$ mount /dev/sda3 /mnt
$ mkdir -p /mnt/boot/efi
$ mount /dev/sda1 /mnt/boot/efi
$ swapon /dev/sda2
```

After this I installed my essential packages[^1], generated `fstab`, and changed root to /mnt. My legacy boot debacle aside, none of the above seemed hellish enough to send me into the arms of Linux Mint, so right now I'm dangerously overconfident I could do this again.

## Finishing
I'll gloss over localization and throw my ricing packages down below.[^2] Two important steps remain for guaranteeing it boots into something more than a terminal. First, enabling essential services with systemd, which for me were:

```bash
$ systemctl enable NetworkManager
$ systemctl enable lightdm
```

But what really ties it all together is configuring the boot manager, in this case grub, which I had installed with `pacstrap` but need to have sorted before reboot with

```bash
$ grub-install /dev/sda
$ grub mkconfig -o /boot/grub/grub.cfg
```

Besides the fact that the ProBook is literally shattering at the edges due to being kicked off a bunk bed in 2017, I'm shocked at how fast it is and enjoying ricing. My biggest problem is the lack of audio. I've tried pulseaudio, alsamixer, sof-firmware, but my only hope is digging through Ubunutu forums for anyone with my exact laptop.

## References 

[Your guide to a damn light Arch linux with i3 and text apps](https://medium.com/avalanche-of-sheep/your-guide-to-a-damn-light-arch-linux-with-i3-and-text-apps-8bc576c502b9)

[these](https://youtube.com/watch?v=xMjI8pypeJE) [youtube](https://youtube.com/watch?v=68z11VAYMS8) [guides](https://youtube.com/watch?v=XhuugVKiHY0)

[^1]: `$ pacstrap /mnt base linux linux-firmware base-devel vim sudo grub networkmanager efibootmgr`
[^2]: `$ pacman -S i3-wm i3status i3blocks lightdm lightdm-gtk-greeter kitty rofi xorg xorg-server xorg-xinit xrandr arandr git wget firefox`

